The Project Gutenberg eBook of Balancing and Shoeing Trotting and Pacing
Horses, by Wm. J. Moore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Balancing and Shoeing Trotting and Pacing Horses

Author: Wm. J. Moore

Release Date: August 19, 2021 [eBook #66089]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BALANCING AND SHOEING TROTTING AND
PACING HORSES ***




                         BALANCING and SHOEING
                       TROTTING and PACING HORSES


                                   By
                              WM. J. MOORE

                     Allen Farm, Pittsfield, Mass.

                NEW ENGLAND’S GREATEST NURSERY OF SPEED

                            CLEVELAND, OHIO
                  PRESS OF THE JUDSON PRINTING COMPANY
                                  1916




                   _Copyright 1916, by Wm. J. Moore_

[Illustration:

  ALLEN FARM BLACKSMITH SHOP—KREMLIN 2:07¾, AGE 29.

  ROBT. SHANKLAND W. J. MOORE

]




                               A TREATISE

                                  —ON—

                       THE ART OF SHOEING HORSES




                             INTRODUCTION.


This is a plain, unvarnished and practical treatise on the art of
balancing and shoeing trotting and pacing horses, unclouded by little
known technical and scientific words and phrases, but written by the
author, WM. J. MOORE, in his own every day words that can be easily
understood by any horseman.

Mr. Moore, who has spent his life in the business of horse shoeing, was
born in Richmond, Virginia, in 1865, and later had charge of the Horse
Shoeing Department of the Allen Farm at Pittsfield, Massachusetts, for a
period of over twenty years, and he is still so engaged at Allen Farm.

Mr. Moore’s experience as a horse shoer dates from the time when he
commenced work in a horse shoeing shop as an apprentice, at the age of
16 years. Since which time horse shoeing has been his sole occupation.

During this period of 35 years Mr. Moore has shod many noted trotting
and pacing horses, and his long, varied and successful experience
justifies the belief that no one is better qualified to write on this
subject, and to offer advice in regard to it, than is he, and it is also
the belief of those best qualified to judge, that no work of this sort,
heretofore written, is more entitled to the confidence of, and
acceptance by, the people who own trotting and pacing horses, for
whatever purpose they may be used.

With this short preamble in the way of an introduction, we will let Mr.
Moore tell his readers in his own words and in his own way how to shoe a
trotter or a pacer, so that it may do its best work in the easiest way,
and for the greatest benefit to its owner.

                                          W. R. ALLEN,
                                              Pittsfield, Massachusetts.

 June, 1916.




                                 INDEX


                                                           Page

              I. Foals                                        1

             II. Preparing the Foot                           3

            III. A Trotter Inclined to Singlefoot and Pace    6

             IV. Causes of Rough Gait                         7

              V. Shin hitting in Front                        8

             VI. To Prevent Winging in                        8

            VII. Shin hitting Behind                          9

           VIII. Knee and Arm Hitting                        10

             IX. Shoeing a Knee knocker                      12

              X. A Bad Hitter                                13

             XI. A Hitting Pacer                             14

            XII. Elbow Hitting                               15

           XIII. An Unusual Case                             17

            XIV. Paddling                                    17

             XV. To Prevent Paddling                         19

            XVI. Hitching, Hopping and Running Behind        19

           XVII. Forging                                     21

          XVIII. Scalping                                    23

            XIX. Remedy for Scalping                         23

             XX. Sideweights                                 25

            XXI. Wheel Swinging                              26

           XXII. Knuckling Over                              27

          XXIII. Stumbling                                   27

           XXIV. Speedy Cutting                              28

            XXV. A Bad One                                   30

           XXVI. Gaiting Colts                               31

          XXVII. Neglected Hind Feet                         35

         XXVIII. Knee Action                                 37

           XXIX. Slow Get Away, Fast Finish                  37

            XXX. To Convert a Pacer                          39

           XXXI. Converting a Trotter                        40

          XXXII. Contracted Heels                            41

         XXXIII. Cause of Contracted Heels                   43

          XXXIV. Corns                                       43

           XXXV. Toe Crack                                   44

          XXXVI. Quartercrack                                44

         XXXVII. Dished Toe                                  46

        XXXVIII. Concussion                                  46

          XXXIX. Founder                                     48

             XL. Cross-firing Pacers                         49

            XLI. Important Note                              50

           XLII. Level Feet                                  52

          XLIII. Pulling on One Line                         54

           XLIV. A Judge of Gait                             55

            XLV. Bar Shoes                                   55

           XLVI. Slipping                                    57

          XLVII. Sideweight Shoes                            58

         XLVIII. Toeweight Shoes                             59

           XLIX. Pocket Weights                              60

              L. Interfering                                 60

                 Conclusion                                  63




                       THE ART OF SHOEING HORSES.


There is something in the foot of the horse that has been a mystery to
many who have been unable to find out the secrets by reading some of the
books that have been printed on the different subjects, and
experimenting on the same, pertaining to a perfect balance of the
trotter and pacer when in action.

I have shod all kinds of horses and have come in contact with all kinds
of feet, and with the results gotten by practical experiments, I will
try to enlighten my readers and the lovers of the light-harness horse.




                               I. FOALS.


The feet of the suckling foal should be properly fixed every four or
five weeks. After the foal is eight or nine weeks old his feet need
fixing regularly. To fix the feet on the young foal shorten the toes as
much as the foot will stand without making the foot tender, and then
rasp the quarters down to a level with the frog, or a little lower than
the top of the frog will be better, then round the sharp edges of foot
off so as the foal will not cut his legs with the sharp edges and the
job is completed. Do not cut out the bars, or the sole, or the frog. Now
if you have noticed that a foal stands toeing out, leave the inside of
the toe of that foot a little the longest from the coronet, an eighth or
three-sixteenths of an inch will be a benefit to the foot, also to the
line of action later on, and if the foal toes in, leave the outside of
the toe the longest, as it will help to straighten matters in the line
of action.

In fixing the foal’s feet it is very good to rasp the quarters and heels
low enough so as to give a slight frog pressure when the foot comes in
contact with the ground. Frog pressure assists expansion and prevents
contraction; a short natural foot with a slight frog pressure during the
first and second year is one of the surest ways to prevent a bad gait or
a _ruptured tendon_, in later years. Young foals should have their feet
picked out two or three times a week to ventilate around the frog,
because the filth that usually gets lodged around there will be almost
sure to cause heat, and in consequence a diseased frog, which perishes
away and allows the heels to contract. A contracted foot is a very bad
thing and causes trouble in more ways than one. If the feet on foals are
left to grow too long, the inside heels will cave in or become
contracted from the position they rest on them while grazing. To prevent
this keep them cut down, if not you will have to use hoof expanders to
get the foot back to its natural position.

One of the most important factors in keeping the feet on sucklings,
weanlings and yearlings in proper condition as is specified in this
article is to see that you are keeping the leg in the middle of the
foot, otherwise many a good horse suffers, as the concussion and strain
is not equally distributed on both sides of the foot when in action. If
the feet on sucklings, weanlings, yearlings and two-year-olds are kept
properly fixed, quarters and heels kept low enough so as to receive a
slight frog pressure, this means at the proper angle, you will not have
any elbow hitters and very few knee-knockers. If you have a yearling
that hits his knees you have not kept his legs in the middle of his feet
by keeping his heels and quarters rasped down, which will make it easier
to prevent winging into his knees than if he had a contracted inside
quarter, which is the case when neglected.




                  II. PREPARING THE FOOT FOR THE SHOE.


To fix feet is the most important part of shoeing the horse. In fixing
the foot, the first thing to take into consideration is, what sort of
work are you fixing the foot for, is it for a draft horse, a road horse,
or a trotter or a pacer? Does the horse wing, paddle, speedy-cut or
cross-fire, does he hit his ankles, shins, knees, arms, hocks, or
elbows? Is his action too high or too low? Is he too long or too short
gaited? Is he striding longer with one leg than another?

If you go to work and cut the feet down without taking some of these
faulty things into consideration you are liable to get his feet just to
the reverse way to what they should be, and place him in an
uncomfortable position instead of a comfortable one. In preparing the
bottom of a horse’s foot you must bear in mind that the foot can be
fixed to straighten out different kinds of faulty action, and if you
have not learned it by a close study of experimenting or by being taught
by some one that knew all the different ways of balancing a foot on the
leg to correct faulty action, then to learn this you will have to have
it explained to you and you should see the job executed, see it done,
and then go and see the results obtained, while the horse is in action.
Then you will know that something is accomplished by scientifically
fixing the feet to correct faulty action; you have to show people
nowadays.

Why I say that fixing the feet is the most important part of shoeing,
and the most difficult to get done, is because the farriers that can
level and balance feet of rough gaited trotters and pacers to assist
nature in correcting faulty action are very scarce, some of them cannot
think long enough while cutting with the rasp and knife, and the first
thing you know they have cut one side of the foot too low and are not
able to cut the opposite side on a level to the side that was cut wrong.

Now to fix the feet of a horse whether front or hind, begin with the
foot first that looks to be the highest at the heels, because if you
should start to fix two feet and one foot is a good deal lower at the
heels than the other you cannot cut the heels of the foot that are the
highest low enough to place the foot at the same angle with its mate, if
you had fixed the foot that had the lowest heels first.

A good rule in fixing feet, and you will find it true nine times out of
ten, is, when fixing _front feet_, always cut the _outside_ from toe to
heel down _first_, unless you are shoeing a _paddler_, then cut the
inside of the foot down to a level to correspond with the outside that
was fixed first. The reason for fixing feet in this manner, is, if you
should cut the inside down first chances are you would not be able to
cut the outside to a level with the inside, for you will cut to the
sensitive part, on the outside of a front foot, quicker than the inside,
and it is just to the reverse with hind feet. The front feet should not
be left high on the outside, unless the horse is a _paddling gaited
one_, for it creates friction, or a strain on landing and leaving the
ground, it also helps to create faulty action. Nearly all the hard shin,
knee and arm hitters I have come in contact with, their front feet were
highest on the outside, low on inside, or a contracted inside quarter,
and sometimes a very badly contracted inside quarter at that. To fix
front feet of trotters and pacers for different purposes or ways of
going you can refer to the index on the different subjects in this book.

There is very little attention paid to the hind feet. They try to get
them the same length and angle, but there are very _few hind feet_
properly fixed to control a perfect line of action, to lengthen or
shorten the stride, to close or widen the action or to elevate or lower
the action. There are very few floormen that can level and balance a
hind foot. In preparing it for a shoe to correct faulty action, the
majority of them do not know how to hold the leg to look at the bottom
of the foot to tell which side is highest. They should keep in mind
while fixing the foot, the results they are trying to get; if they do
not, they are liable to get the foot too low on one side or the other. A
hind foot that is left the highest on the inside is a dangerous weapon
to a trotter or pacer; it will cause injury to ankle ligaments and to
bones of the foot. In the majority of cases the angle of a hind foot
should be several degrees shorter than the angle of the front feet. A
hind foot that is left the highest on the inside on a trotter or pacer
will have a tendency to close up the line of action of the hind leg and
create cross-firing and shin, hock, ankle and pastern hitting. As the
coffin or pedal bone of a horse’s foot is symmetrical in shape, it is
not proper to have wings of abnormal growth more on one side of the foot
than on the other, for this constitutes an unbalanced foot. If it
measures more on one side of the foot than on the other, from the center
of the frog, make both sides alike, to balance up matters and to conform
with the shape of the coffin bone inside; if the toe of one foot is
longer than that of the other it creates a longer leverage to leave the
ground from, therefore the stride of that leg would naturally be a
little longer, everything else being equal. If the heels of one foot are
left higher than those of its mate, the stride would be a little shorter
and the jar or concussion greater. A good rule in fixing _hind_ feet is,
always cut or rasp the _inside_ of foot down _first_, because you can
always get the outside of a hind foot cut down to the level of the
inside. A foot should be fixed so that the leg will be kept in the
middle of the foot. If the foot has a contracted quarter, one side or
the other, you cannot do it until the contracted quarter is expanded,
which is easily done (see article on contracted feet). It is difficult
to fix feet to suit the leg, and line of action, and also some people’s
eye, all at the same time. The frog of the horse’s foot should never be
cut, if it is in a healthy state. A diseased frog that has loose
fragments hanging to it may be trimmed off so as not to be holding
filth. Never cut the _heels open_ with a knife or rasp to make the foot
look wider across the heels, a practice that has long existed with some
people. It is unnatural, it helps to contract the heels, and shortens
the bearing surface from toe to heel. Any one that does this is
dangerous. Trimming out the frog, opening the heels with the knife,
cutting out the bars, and too much of the sole, will give you a
hoofbound and contracted sore-footed horse, it will help to shorten up
his gait and sometimes make him rough gaited. Feet of this kind cannot
stand the jar or concussion that feet can that have been properly
treated.




            III. A TROTTER INCLINED TO SINGLEFOOT AND PACE.


The first thing to do is to change the angle of his front feet to a
longer one by rasping the quarters and heels down several degrees, do
not take anything off the toes. The hind feet should be in length and
angle nearly the same as the front feet, perhaps an eighth of an inch
shorter at the toe, and within 3 degrees of the same angle. The second
thing is to add about 3 or 4 ounces more weight to the front shoes, and
a little more if needed, after you have tried the former. If the horse
carries a toe weight put it on also. The third thing to do is to put
calks on the hind shoes, toe and heel, using as light a shoe as
possible. The fourth thing to do is to allow the animal to go as _low
headed_ as possible, this is _very important_. The changes in the
footing of different tracks will sometimes cause a horse to become all
unbalanced. Slipping is very bad for a horse when at speed; it
unbalances the action and creates muscle soreness, and the poor animal
is made to suffer torture by some of the drivers or trainers, because
the animal does not perform as well on a track that don’t suit the
shoeing as he did on a previous occasion that did suit, the same way
shod. I must say in reference to trotters that are inclined to
singlefoot and pace that in fixing the hind feet I would prefer to get
the angle of the hind feet as near to the angle of the front feet as
possible, because it helps to confine them to the pure trot. The shorter
the toe and angle of the hind feet as compared with the front, the
quicker they will go into a singlefoot and pace. The causes of the
roughness in the gait of the trotter are that the feet are at too short
an angle, not carrying weight enough in front, and checked too high, or
slipping too much.




                 IV. CAUSES FOR BECOMING ROUGH GAITED.


The front feet or the hind feet are not mates, or _high heels on one
foot and low heels on the opposite_; they are cut too low on one side to
hang level compared with the opposite side of the same foot, a long toe
on one foot and a short toe on the opposite foot; these variations
create a different angle, when it should be the same; that is, the front
feet should be mates and the hind feet should be mates. Cutting out the
frog, bars and sole, and opening the heels with the knife will also lead
to a rough gait when the foot is dry and hard, and the horse strikes a
hard track at speed. Carrying head too high, too low, or to one side, or
pulling on bit too strong will do the same thing.

After fixing the front feet as directed, do not leave the heels on the
hind feet high or the toes of the hind feet too short, fix the hind feet
by leaving the toes long enough and the heels low enough to create an
angle to within a few degrees the same as the front feet. This will
prevent breaking over too quick which increases the liability to
singlefoot, and fixing hind feet this way lengthens the stride and helps
to confine the action to the trot longer and purer.




                   V. SHIN HITTING OF THE FRONT LEGS.


A foot left too high on the outside from centre of toe back to the
outside heel will cause this. Some travel very close and others wing in:
this winging in is not always because of an imperfect or unbalanced
foot, sometimes it is caused by a deformity of the leg, or a contraction
of the muscles or ligaments, sometimes they will be either longer or
stronger on one side of the leg than on the other, which has a tendency
to control winging or paddling. To fix a foot that is hitting the shins
of the front legs, shorten the toe to a natural length foot, while doing
this keep lowering the outside of the foot, leaving the inside of the
foot quite a bit higher, by actual measurement, in some cases a quarter
of an inch higher or longer is not too much. Shoe with a plain shoe or a
side weight shoe with the heavy side of shoe on the inside of each foot,
the heavy or wider side of the shoe will prevent sinking in the ground,
which will help matters. Bevel or hot rasp the inside edge of shoe from
the inside toe back to the quarters. Shoe with the weight that the horse
goes best with.




             VI. HOW TO MAKE A SHOE TO PREVENT WINGING IN.


Make a heavy side weight shoe, the same kind of shoe as for a paddler
but the weight or heavy side of shoe will have to be on the inside of
the foot. Fix the feet, according to article in this book on winging in,
to receive this shoe. Bevel or round off the inside toe back to quarters
on this shoe. With the foot properly fixed for this shoe there will be
an immediate change. If a toe weight is used keep spur towards inside
toe from centre of foot but not far enough to hit knee boot.




                  VII. SHIN HITTING OF THE HIND LEGS.


There are different causes for this trouble. In the trotter it is
because the hind action and the front action do not work in harmony with
one another. Excessive hind action will cause it, or excessive front
action in some cases will cause it. A front foot that is highest or
longest on the outside toe will cause it. What will cause it the
quickest and more severely is a _high inside_ on the _hind foot_,
especially on a horse that has been going open gaited behind. If your
horse has plenty of action in front and is going in a medium light shoe
I would advise you to level his hind feet; be sure and do not have the
_inside_ of hind feet the _highest_ (which is nearly always the case),
but if anything have it a shade the lowest, and shoe the hind feet with
an outside weight shoe several ounces heavier than he has been carrying;
this will widen his hind action and when he gets to going the weight
will keep him outside and clear. This weight can be decreased as his
gait is being perfected. The most particular part of this will be to get
his _feet properly_ prepared to help the line of action.

Perhaps your horse is short in his front action, low and dwelling
gaited, too much so for his hind action, if so, shoe him in front with
heavier shoe, say 5 ounce heavier or even more as the case may need,
bevel or roll the toe, also bevel the outside edge from the outside toe
to heel of front shoes where the shin hitting is done. If your horse
wings in towards his knees or arms, the inside of front feet should be
left the highest. I prefer in shoeing such horses to keep them going as
close in line as possible with hind legs and if he cannot, without
interference, then they will have to go outside (see article on how to
widen hind action).




                      VIII. KNEE AND ARM HITTING.


This has been a great worry to “the smart set,” “the know it alls” for
many years, as to what causes it, and what to do to help or prevent it.
Winging in is caused sometimes by a deformity, or by contracted muscles
or ligaments stronger on one side of the leg than on the other;
sometimes deformed feet, or a badly contracted inside quarter will be
the cause of some of this trouble, because the weight of the horse at
the ankle drops over the inside heel instead of coming down in the
middle of the foot. A contracted inside quarter and a high or long
outside toe are dangerous weapons for a horse to be carrying, one of
these at a time is bad enough, but when a foot is troubled with both it
is _very bad_. If your knee or arm hitter has a contracted quarter on a
front foot, the first thing to do is to get a hoof expander and expand
the contracted quarter. This will be an important step towards getting
the leg in the middle of the foot. In all my experience with knee and
arm hitters I have found the offending foot too high on the outside,
with the most of the foot from the center of the frog on the outside of
the leg. With height and width of foot on the outside of the leg, it is
just contrary to science. To straighten the line of action this needs to
be reversed; edge up the outside edge of the foot from the outside toe
to the point at quarters as much as it will stand, do it at every
shoeing and you will be getting the leg closer to the middle of the
foot. If you can get a little more of the foot on the inside of the leg
than is on the outside, it will be a benefit to a bad knee and arm
hitter. Another thing, the shorter the toe or angle of a knee hitter the
easier he can leave the ground and the less he will wing in, and the
lighter will be the blow if he hits. The knee hitter should be shod as
lightly as he will go at speed, balanced. The lighter the weight he is
carrying the lighter the blow if he strikes. The best kind of a shoe for
a knee hitter is a side weight shoe with the heavy side on the inside of
the foot; good results are obtained with heel and toe calks, the toe
calks _well set back_ on the toe of the shoe.

These calks on the shoe of a knee and arm hitter should be a little thin
so as to catch hold of the ground as the foot goes to twist before he
picks it up; they will prevent a certain amount of twisting while the
body of the animal is gliding over the weight-bearing portion of the leg
as the foot leaves the ground. They will have a tendency to make him
break over squarer and not so hard on the outside toe as the foot is
leaving the ground. Now if your knee hitter wears a toe weight attach it
towards the inside toe as far as possible but not far enough to the
inside so as he will strike the opposite leg with it. When the feet of a
knee hitter have been gotten in the shape as described herein and shod
accordingly; why, the horse will think that he has been baptized and
born over again. A perfect foot is rare, but with good judgment, a good
eye and a little patience and perseverance a lot can be accomplished
that will surprise some of those that think they know it all. In a knee
hitter, also in an arm hitter, the bones of the foot and leg do not work
true in their sockets, clear up to the knee, even the joint at the knee
does not work true, the knee joint has a faulty motion, instead of
breaking straight forward, it breaks out sideways as the rest of the leg
starts to wing in. By building the foot mostly to the inside of the leg
and having width and height of foot on the inside you are taking some of
the power away that causes the winging in, and the breaking outward of
the knee. It is something strange, but I have known knee and shin and
arm hitters to be turned out with their shoes on in paddocks, and you
would seldom see them hurt themselves, but put the harness on, hitch
them up, and start them at speed and take a pull of 75 or 100 pounds on
their lower jaw and the trouble would begin. The directions in this
article for fixing the foot for knee and arm hitting are also the surest
remedy for horses that toe out badly, a fault that is so objectionable
to all horsemen. If you use a sideweight shoe on a front foot to prevent
shin, knee and arm hitting, the heavy part of shoe should be on the
inside of foot, but if you leave the outside of the foot one-sixteenth
or one-eighth of an inch higher than the inside, you will be working
against the results you are looking for.

It looks strange to many people that an outside weight shoe to a _front
foot_ has a tendency to make a horse wing in, and the same shoe applied
to a hind foot will widen the hind action, with the foot fixed for that
purpose. If you can fix the foot _properly_ to control the line of
action that you want, you will surely accomplish something. You should
know what angle suits the action best. The foot should be symmetrical in
shape to conform with the coffin bone, have no more foot on one side of
the frog than on the other side, and the bearing surface to hang so as
the foot will land on and leave the ground as square or level as
possible.




 IX. JOGGING A KNEE KNOCKER WINTER AND SPRING, AND THE BEST WAY TO SHOE
                AND FIX THE FOOT TO DEVELOP THE MUSCLES.


Lower the outside of the foot of the winging in leg, and _keep it the
lowest_. Shoe the foot with a _very light shoe_, plain or bar shoe, have
a side pocket weight made that will carry from 6 to 9 ounces of lead
with a spur on it; cut or burn a hole in the bottom edge of the foot
midway between toe and heel for the spur, buckle it tight to foot, the
weight to be on inside of foot. If the horse wings in with both front
feet use the pocket weights on both feet and fix both feet as directed
above. This will have a wonderful effect _in developing muscle_ while
taking his slow work that will help to prevent winging in so bad when he
begins faster work. This knee knocker should be shod with a side weight
shoe, the heft of weight on inside of foot, shoe should be very light on
outside. This shoe should be made thick on inside with a bevel thinned
towards the outside toe, a difficult shoe to make to be used when pocket
weights are discarded for fast work.




              X. A BAD SHIN, KNEE AND ARM HITTER, TROTTER.


A chronic shin, knee and arm hitter was a horse called Rustler, owned at
Richmond, Va. In the early part of the summer that he raced so well, he
was working miles around 2:41 and 2:42 but very unsteady, breaking
continually. He would begin by hitting his shins, as speed was increased
he would hit his knees and arms so hard that he would not stay on the
trot. He was brought to me to shoe by his colored groom, who also
brought his boots, as I had never seen the horse in action, but after
seeing the boots he wore, I saw at a glance he needed as far as gaiting
or balancing was concerned, to be regenerated. He was a large horse, and
his feet had not grown much from the last shoeing so as I could change
them to my liking. I was informed that he went best in light shoes, but
the owner told me to use my own judgment, so I did. I made a pair of
sideweight shoes, 18 ounces with toe and heel calks, the heavy side of
shoes on the inside of each front foot, the outside of each front shoe
as light as possible. After leveling his hind feet, a light shoe with
heel calks was put on. The owner, Mr. C. J. Smith of Richmond, Va., came
to the shop and looked at the front shoes and did not like the job, as
to the weight and the calks, thinking if he did not knock a leg off, he
would cut boots and legs to smithereens. I told him I would change them
if he thought it best, but before I got ready to take them off he said
leave them on and I will try them and see what he will do with them. The
groom drove him out to the track, and Mr. Smith, being present, ordered
the groom to drive him a slow mile as the trainer was not there; he
worked the second mile so easy that he was worked another easy mile in
2:21, the last quarter well within himself in 33 seconds without a
break, over the same half-mile track on which he could not beat 2:41
previous to this shoeing. They said when he got on his stride there was
nothing the matter with him. I had not heard from the horse for nearly a
week when one day as the owner was driving by I hailed him asking how
was Rustler, he said “he is all right, there isn’t a thing the matter
with him.” He went to the races, started in at Baltimore, Maryland, and
after winning seven or eight consecutive races, finished at Readville a
close second in 2:12. Most of his races were won in the same front shoes
it took to balance him, and yet some writers will say you cannot get
immediate results.




                 XI. SHIN, KNEE AND ARM HITTING PACER.


H. J. Rockwell and Rustler a pacer and trotter respectively, would hit
and cut their boots something terrible. I took H. J. Rockwell away from
his knees by the mode of foot fixing and shoeing hereinbefore prescribed
and that made a race horse of him, whereas he had been hitting his knees
for several years. While he was hitting his knees he was rated as a
quitter, but after he began to beat horses like “B. B.” over the
half-mile tracks, the race followers wanted to know from his trainer,
the late F. M. Dodge, what he had done to him. I mention this particular
case because the public or horsemen that knew this horse knew he was a
tough proposition to balance.




                          XII. ELBOW HITTING.


Some horses do this when being speeded. It is caused by excessive knee
action, in folding up of the leg, also in the flexing of the pastern
joint. It is faulty or lost action. For elbow hitting, as a rule, the
horse should be made to go in as light a shoe as possible, he should get
his training with his front feet kept as low as possible at the quarters
and heels and the foot at an angle of about 49 degrees, he should be
shod as light as possible with plain or bar shoes, and with as light a
_toe weight_ as possible, for the more toe weight he carries the harder
he will go to his elbows. Most all elbow hitters hit their elbows with
the toes of the shoe while the knee is being elevated. It would be a
hard matter for a horse to hit his elbows with the heels of the shoes
with the knee extended and elevated, for at this time is when the fold
of the knee and flexing of the pastern causes the toe of the shoe to
strike against the elbow. If preparing the foot for the shoe as stated
above and shoeing the feet light does not stop the elbow hitting apply a
bar shoe with most all the weight in the bar and quarters of the shoe,
the shoe being light as possible around the toe where the nail holes are
punched. Be sure and have the quarters and heels as low as possible. The
reason for low quarters and heels on an elbow hitter is, that it makes a
longer angle to leave the ground from, and it gives a longer bearing
surface behind the leg, to receive the weight that is in the quarters
and bar of the shoe which is put there to prevent some of the folding of
the knee and some of the flexing of the pastern that causes the
interference. I have been very successful shoeing elbow hitters with
this kind of a shoe. All elbow hitters should be worked to go as low
headed as possible, a standing martingale works well on some. If you put
on too much of a toe weight on some horses that go close to their elbows
it will drive their action to, or against their elbows. Now this being
the case, if toe weights will drive him to his elbows a heel weight will
usually prevent folding against the elbows.

Now in making this shoe for an elbow hitter it will be necessary to add
from four to six ounces more weight to the shoes than he has been
carrying, but put it all in the quarters and bar at the heels, and keep
adding weight to the heels of front shoes until he stops hitting his
elbows. This kind of a shoe is to be used when a very light shoe fails
to prevent elbow hitting. Squaring the toe of the shoe will also help to
lighten the blow, or take him that much farther away from his elbows.

To decrease the lofty folding action of elbow hitters the foot should be
placed at an angle of from 47 to 49 degrees or as near to that as
possible, and add the amount of weight of shoes he has been carrying to
the toe weight and also add not less than four or five ounces more to
each of a pair of heel weight shoes, when a light one did not answer. Do
not use any toe weight, but if the heel weight bar shoes are not heavy
enough, a heavier shoe or quarter boot can be used.

One thing that should not be overlooked in a horse hitting his elbows is
his hind action, it should be examined closely. The hind action may be
too dwelling gaited, the stride may be too short or too long. Now if the
hind action is of a sluggish nature, it will be a benefit to increase
his propelling power, it will drive his elbow an inch, more or less,
away from the flexing of the foot against it. If he is long and dwelly
gaited you can quicken or make him more rapid, if he is striding too
short you can lengthen his stride by fixing his feet and applying
weight. It is very important to increase his propelling power. A horse
that hits his elbows needs to be balanced by foot fixing, and the
applying of weight to go on as light a line as possible, because the
harder he pulls on the bit when at speed the more he is inclined to hit
his elbows.

If the hind stride is too long and dwelly, shorten the hind toes
considerably and use a square toe shoe and raise the heels with a side
calk. If the hind stride is too short lower the quarters and heels of
the hind feet as much as they will stand and add two or three ounces
more weight to the hind shoes. With toe and heel calks a horse with a
long cannon bone, with lofty action that flexes his foot from the ground
with a snap is more likely to hit his elbows than a horse with shorter
cannon bones.




                XIII. AN UNUSUAL CASE OF ELBOW HITTING.


A horse that hits the right elbow with the left foot and the left elbow
with the right foot is seldom seen. The horse _Hunter Hill_ would begin
doing this when going at a 2:40 gait or better, and would act bad and
unsteady. He was brought to me to shoe and I was told he could not carry
any weight. As he had not enough foot to change, I told the trainer he
would have to carry weight to counteract the faulty winging in to the
elbows. I made a pair of eighteen ounce heavy side weight shoes with the
weight on the inside of each front shoe, thin heel and toe calks, toe
calks well set back on toe of front shoes. These shoes took him away
from his elbows and he raced good over the half-mile tracks stepping
miles around 2:12. After he got gaited these sideweight shoes were
discarded for plain lighter shoes.




                             XIV. PADDLING.


Just the reverse to winging in, a tiresome lost motion, a source of
worry to horse and driver, especially if the horse has speed and is
driven on sharp turns on half-mile tracks, but it is not as dangerous as
the winging in hard to knees. Paddling is more easily controlled than
winging in. Now to straighten the paddler, fix the foot on the leg that
paddles, by cutting or rasping the inside of the foot from the inside
toe back to the inside heel as low as possible, leaving the outside toe
the highest or longest to leave the ground from. Be sure and have the
inside of foot the lowest, the outside toe the longest. To begin this an
angle close to 50 degrees or less, say 49, will have wonderful effect.
The long or high toe on the outside will have a tendency to make the leg
wing towards his knees at speed which is the controlling influence
against paddling. The long or high outside toe is the part that has to
leave the ground the last, which _creates winging_, and helps to stop
paddling. To shoe a paddler, shoe with a light shoe, with as little
weight as possible to go balanced. The more weight the more he will
paddle, the less weight the less paddle.

The best shoe for a bad paddler is a sideweight shoe extra heavy on the
outside of foot, bevel the outside edges of front shoes good. If the
change of action is not quick enough you can use a toe weight placed on
the foot well to the outside toe of foot. When I could not get the
inside of foot low enough compared with the outside of foot I have made
the front shoes thicker on the outside than the inside. When you have
fixed the feet and shod a paddler this way you will begin to think that
paddling can be stopped when at speed. Most paddlers must go as light in
front as possible. With the feet fixed and shod as herein stated you
will be surprised at the change of action that will take place when at
speed, after a week’s driving. The faster the paddler is driven the less
paddling he will be doing. The outside of the foot on a paddler needs to
be kept the highest, which is just to the reverse of a knee and arm
hitter, this applies to the front feet and action of the front legs.




              XV. HOW TO MAKE A SHOE TO PREVENT PADDLING.


Take a piece of iron or steel two or three ounces heavier than the shoe
the horse has been carrying and draw one end of it very light having it
quite thin. Make a heavy outside weight shoe of it, leaving all the
thickness at the outside toe of shoe, thin the outside heel down to the
same as the inside heel. The outside edge of this shoe will be thick,
but tapering thin to the inside edge of the outside web of shoe. This
shoe begins to get light, narrow and very thin at centre of toe around
to inside heel. Look up article on foot fixing to prevent paddling at
speed when using this shoe. The horse’s foot will have to leave the
ground from the outside toe of this shoe when stepping fast and this
will have a tendency to make him wing in, and the line of action will
become straighter as the animal becomes accustomed to it. This change
can be quite _radical_, on a horse that has been paddling a long time,
and not so rank on young stock just beginning to get gaited. This shoe
does not stop the paddling on all animals when jogging slow as the foot
can leave the ground or break over from center or inside toe of shoe,
which has no control to prevent a slight paddle.




               XVI. HITCHING, HOPPING OR RUNNING BEHIND.


This way of going comes from different causes. An unbalanced foot from
being improperly fixed, will cause it. The improper weight of shoes at
one end or the other, or all around, will cause it; speeding a colt or
horse that is pulling too much weight, especially up a grade, will cause
it; forging, scalping, speedy cutting, shin and hock hitting will cause
it; carrying the head to one side at times will cause it; soreness of
the back, rump or muscles of whirlbone, stifle or thigh will cause it.

Examine the faulty leg for soreness, for if the horse is not lame from
soreness somewhere, he can be balanced to go true. If a horse begins
hitching, his fast work should be stopped until he is properly balanced,
for no horse can improve his speed after he becomes rough gaited without
danger to himself. The first thing to do is to get him balanced. First,
see that his feet are level. Nine times out of ten you will find his
feet are not mates or do not hang level, you will find the foot on the
offending leg that is doing the damage different from its mate. In all
my experience I have found the foot on the faulty gaited leg to be very
high on the inside, if not at the toe, it would be at the heel, but the
majority of times it would be high from toe to heel, which would be the
main cause of the hitching. Fix the front feet to hang level, the angle
and length of toes the same. The two hind feet should be at the same
angle and have the same length of toe. The foot of the faulty going leg
should be made the _lowest on the inside_ and the shoe to be used on
this foot must weigh double the weight or from one to three ounces more
than double the weight of the one on the opposite hind foot. This shoe
can be made with the weight in the outside, with the inside edge from
the centre of toe back to the inside quarter rounded or beveled off
considerably, fit the shoe full to the outside toe. If the hitching
horse is shod according to these directions and does not begin to go
better gaited, it is because he is lame. If he carries five-ounce shoes
behind put twelve or thirteen ounce on the faulty gaited leg and the
light shoe on perfect gaited leg.




                             XVII. FORGING.


This is a very annoying fault and the same rules to remedy it do not
apply to all horses, for what will stop one may not stop another. Most
all forging will be done jogging, or going an ordinary road gait. From
forging comes the scalping which is very dangerous when the horse begins
to brush along, as scalping creates rough and bad gaited horses. There
are many horses that will forge or scalp going slow in the same shoes
that suit them for speed. It is hard to shoe all horses with a set of
shoes that will suit the horse, the driver and a faulty gait at varying
rates of speed, all at the same time. Horses that are _low gaited_ in
front that forge jogging, need as a rule, a lot more weight in their
front shoes. Horses that go high gaited with lots of knee action in
front that forge require a light shoe. Forgers usually have excessive
action either in front or behind. Locate the faulty end, see if the
horse has too much action in front and not enough behind, or if he has
too much behind and not enough in front. Get a line on his gait before
you make any changes, perhaps you may not have to change but one end of
him to either increase or decrease action. Weight in the shoe is the
important factor applied to a perfectly balanced foot, whether it is a
front foot or a hind foot. You can add weight to the front or hind feet,
as may be desired, to increase action, or decrease the weight to
decrease the action at either end. Now right here I will say, a horse
jogging hardly feels a change of weight of one, two or three ounces, but
will show the effect of five or six ounces from the start. Do not be
afraid to apply a heavy shoe to hind feet for if his action requires it
to prevent forging, the horse will like it better and so will you.

In adding weight to hind feet you will be increasing the hock action and
in some horses it will take considerable weight to do it; horses going
an ordinary road gait will not feel one, two or three ounces increase of
weight in hind shoes. Horses stepping fast as a rule do not do any
forging and, of course, the lighter they can go the better. There are
many horses—fast trotters—that forge or scalp jogging, that would go
cleaner or purer by applying a four-ounce toe weight, some may need a
five-ounce weight, lots of them have to be jogged too fast in order to
prevent forging or scalping, when perhaps a toe weight would be the
remedy. A horse going a 2:10 gait will feel the effects of a one or two
ounce weight as much as one going a slow gait would feel the effects of
four or five ounces.

Take a side view of your horse as he is driven by and locate the faulty
action, you will be able to tell if it is too short, too long, too high
or too low, too rapid or too dwelly, front or hind action. If the lost
action is in front as to height, extension or rapidity, fix the feet to
help the shoes to perfect the action. If the front action is too low
shorten the toes, leave the heels high or raise them with shoe or side
calks and shoe with a shoe five or six ounces heavier, more or less, as
the action requires, use a square or bevel toe shoe. A rolling toe shoe
is good on slow-going horses, the horse should carry his head higher
than usual. If the front action is too high, lower the quarters and
heels as low as they will stand, and shoe with a light shoe, and if
there is not extension enough use a toe weight to balance up action, the
horse should carry his head lower, or natural. If the hind action is too
low shorten toes as much as they will stand and add several ounces more
weight and raise the heels a half inch or more. If hind action is too
high lower quarters and heels as low as they will stand, keeping plenty
of toe on hind feet and shoe with a very light shoe to prevent slipping.
If he is handling his hind legs too rapid for the front ones, this last
sentence will remedy that also. I have seen obstinate forgers at a slow
gait stopped by carrying from two to three times more weight on the hind
feet than in the front feet, and vice versa, according to their front or
hind action.




                            XVIII. SCALPING.


This is a very dangerous fault. When a horse is making speed and begins
scalping, he is unbalanced quite bad, he needs changing before being
speeded again for if you don’t he or she will get rough gaited, or will
begin carrying the hind leg between front ones, hopping, or trying to
run with hind action. The first thing to do is to examine the hind feet,
you are likely to find the hind feet a lot higher on the inside than on
the outside nine times out of ten. Some horses will begin scalping after
their feet get too long. In horses with excessive action, carrying too
much weight in front will cause scalping at speed. Horses with very
little action in front and not carrying weight enough will be liable to
scalp at speed. When shoeing for scalping use a square toe shoe, light
or heavy, as may be required by the front action.

Feet all out of proportion and at the wrong angle and not level will
cause scalping. Now if the animal has very little hock action and mostly
stifle action, I would lower and shorten the toes of the hind feet as
much as possible, use a square toe shoe and raise the heels with a side
calk, this will shorten the stride and by adding some weight to the hind
shoe it will increase hock action. Most all scalping is done with front
or outside toe of the front shoe coming in contact with the coronet of
hind foot. It hurts the horse so much that he will try to find some way
to avoid it; some trainers use a gaiting pole to prevent the horse from
going crooked in the shafts because of this fault.




                       XIX. REMEDY FOR SCALPING.


If the front action is low, long and of a sluggish nature, shorten the
toes of feet considerable and add about five ounces more weight to the
shoes, or more, if required to create a more lofty knee fold. The action
of some horses requires a lot more weight than others to make the
change. The shoes to be used, if working to make speed should be a
square toe shoe, or a beveled toe shoe, also a wedged shaped shoe thick
at the heels and thin at the toe is good, squared at the toe. For
ordinary road driving a rolling toe shoe is good, but not for extreme
speed, as it has a tendency with most horses to slip back too much on
leaving the ground; and the horse should be made to carry his head
higher than usual. If the front action is high, short, or too rapid, not
working in harmony with the hind, lower the quarters and heels of front
feet as much as they will stand and keep a fair length toe on the front
feet and shoe with a very light shoe and use a toe weight to balance for
extension, place a spur for toe weight well up on toe of foot out of way
of the scalping; and the horse should be made to go as low headed as is
comfortable to him.

If the hind action is low, long or of a dwelling nature, shorten the
toes as much as they will stand, and shoe, to elevate the heels, with a
thick heel shoe, or raise the heels with side calks. A few ounces more
weight than he has been carrying will be all the better to make him use
his hocks more. If the hind action is high and choppy with not much
extension, lower quarters and heels as much as they will stand and keep
a fair length toe on him, it will keep him closer to the ground; and
shoe light to prevent slipping.

A side view of the animal as he is driven by you will give you the
correct view of his front and hind action. If the action is too short,
too long, too high or too low, in front or behind, the chances are you
may not have to change but one end of him if you have a good eye for
locating faulty action. If your horse is good and can beat his record,
or go the race of his life, and scalps jogging, try a toe weight on him
in front, if it does not stop him wear scalpers on him jogging and let
well enough alone.

I have had to take a three and one-half ounce shoe off a colt that
trotted eighths of a mile in seventeen and a quarter seconds, that was
scalping jogging, and shoe him with a ten and a half ounce heel weight
shoe nailed back near quarters of hind feet to prevent him from scalping
at the jog, after two changes in the front shoeing.




                            XX. SIDEWEIGHTS.


Sideweight shoes with the weight on the outside have a different effect
or result on front and hind action. An outside weight shoe on a front
foot has a tendency to make the leg wing in, and an outside weight shoe
on a hind foot will widen and lengthen the stride, if feet are properly
prepared, so you see it widens the hind action and closes the front
action. To close the action of the front leg with this sideweight, lower
the front foot on the inside. To widen the action of hind leg, lower the
inside of hind feet. This sideweight shoe will help a paddler that has
to carry a little weight, if you will lower the inside of the foot, but
it is no good for a knee knocker. The outside weight shoe has a
different effect on front and hind action, has a tendency to close one
and widen the other.

Sideweight shoes are good to correct the following faulty lines of
action if the feet are correctly prepared for them to help the shoe, for
if the foot, or feet, are not properly fixed to help the line of action
this faulty fixed foot will work against the effect of the sideweight,
and the results will be very unsatisfactory. Sideweight shoes are best
for winging in, or paddling out, with front legs, hitching or hopping or
carrying a hind leg in, out of line, or carrying a hind leg between the
front legs, also good for a wheel swinging hind leg.




                          XXI. WHEEL SWINGING.


A trotter that is wheel swinging a hind leg, has developed a line of
action that is tiresome, controlled mostly by the muscles on the outside
of leg, that unbalances action at speed to a certain extent, and it
looks unsightly to a good judge of gait, when coming to you or going
from you. To correct this faulty line of action of wheel swinging, keep
the toe of hind feet nearly as long as the front feet, and have the
angle of the hind feet within two or three degrees of the same as the
front feet. If the angle of front feet is fifty degrees have the angle
of the hind feet about fifty-two or three degrees. Lower the outside of
hind foot a full quarter of an inch or more than it will be on the
inside, begin lowering the outside of hind foot at the center of toe
back to outside heel, have both hind feet the same length and angle.
Shoe with a sideweight shoe heaviest side of shoe on inside of foot,
with heelcalks, and place a thin low calk about one inch long on inside
toe of shoe in line from first to second nail holes. After the first
shoeing, if line of action has not improved as it should, you must lower
the outside of hind foot still more, but if you cannot lower the foot
have a shoe made thicker on the inside toe and thinner on the outside
toe and quarters, with the three calks on it and there will be more of a
change. This change can be made in the first shoeing if you have enough
of foot to change, but it is best for the horse and owner not to make
too radical a change too quickly. It is best to do it in two or three
shoeings, especially on a horse that has a lot of speed. Slow going
horses can stand more of a radical change than fast ones.

The directions in this article for the cure of wheel swinging, by foot
fixing and shoeing, will create a sudden change, at different points, on
the bones of the foot and leg, so as to create a leverage at a
particular point as the foot leaves the ground, to control a more
perfect line of action. Be sure your horse is not carrying his head off
to one side, the opposite side to the wheel swinging leg, for if so this
helps to unbalance action and works against the results you are trying
to get to a certain extent. Do not have the outside heel of shoe any
longer than the inside but have both same length.




                         XXII. KNUCKLING OVER.


This is caused by weakness, sometimes of the ligaments that hold the
bones of ankle in their sockets, and sometimes higher up. To shoe for
this, the first thing to do is to prepare the foot. You are likely to
find the hind feet abnormally long, perhaps longer than the front feet.
Lower the toes of hind feet as much as they will stand, shorten toes by
rasping off as much as the foot will stand, do not _touch_ the heels or
have the inside of foot higher than the outside. Now use a light hind
shoe, with side calks, the calks to be one and a half to two inches
long, and tapering towards the toe of shoe. At the point of heel this
calk should be not less than one-half inch high, the higher the better,
a square toe shoe is much better than a plain one, shod this way the
very best result is obtained at once. A shoe made thick at heels,
three-quarters of an inch or more, and thin at the toe for ordinary
driving is good.




                           XXIII. STUMBLING.


Is a very dangerous fault and is from a weakness that can be helped a
lot. The front feet of a stumbler should be kept as short as possible at
the toe. Elevate the heels as much as would be comfortable to the leg
and horse. A stumbler should be made to carry some weight in his front
shoes because the weight increases knee action, and this is what you
want in a stumbler. Shoe with a toeweight shoe thick at the heels, for
height, and roll the toes of the shoes as much as possible, a bevel toed
shoe is also good, keep the heels middling high, and the toes cut down
low and shortened up. These shoes are not very good for fast work, as
they will slip back too much on leaving the ground, which retards speed
but will help to make speed in lots of slow ones that require action.




                         XXIV. SPEEDY CUTTING.


A horse that is taking his work and is “speed cutting” and still
continues to be a good actor must be game. Speed cutting begins at the
coronet or a little higher up and continues up the pastern mostly on the
inside of leg to the top of ankle and even above that. There are three
things that cause this, the most prominent one to look for, is the
inside of the hind feet are a lot higher than the outside; seven times
out of ten the outside of front feet will be found longer or higher than
the inside. The horse may or may not be carrying the proper weight. If
he is pulling a part of a ton on the bit to hold him together, he is not
properly balanced with weight. The hitting is mostly done with the
outside toe of the front shoe. If you can find some one who can level
and balance these feet on the legs there will be a big change in the
action.

Excessive front, and not enough of hind, action will cause speed
cutting. Excessive hock and stifle action and not enough action in front
will also cause it. When the action is excessive, decrease it by
lowering the quarters and heels and by shoeing very light, if the action
of the other end needs to be increased, shorten the toes and add weight,
do not be afraid, four to five ounces will be better to experiment with
than one or two. After the horse gains confidence he may not need any
extra weight. The most important thing will be to find some one who can
fix the feet, and the feet will be found as I have stated above. There
are very few who are good judges of a balanced foot. It takes an expert
to detect the high and low side of a foot. Horses that wing into their
knees and those that paddle away from their knees, and line trotters,
contract this fault because of an improperly prepared foot to control
the faulty line of action and at times not carrying the proper amount of
weight front and hind to balance the action so that the hind action will
work in harmony with the front.

If the horse wings in toward his knees with one or both front feet fix
the front feet according to the directions in this book in the chapter
on winging in or knee hitting. If the horse paddles out away from his
knees, I refer you to the chapter on Paddling to prepare his feet by,
and use the shoes therein prescribed. If the front action is excessive
and lofty you must lower the quarters and heels to give him a longer
leverage to leave the ground from, and shoe with a light shoe, and
balance him with a toe weight for extension, and have the feet the same
length and angle.

To prepare the feet on a speedy cutter, rasp down or lower the inside of
foot from centre of toe back to inside heel to a level or a fraction
lower than the outside of the foot, have the toes of both feet the same
length, and at the angle he shows the most speed with. Shoe with a
sideweight shoe, the heavy side of shoe on the outside of foot and
calked to prevent slipping.

To shorten the hind stride use a light shoe, raise the heels and shorten
the toes of the hind feet as much as they will stand. To lengthen the
stride of the hind feet, lower the quarters and heels to a longer angle
to leave the ground from, and add several ounces more weight than the
horse has been carrying to each shoe; the inside edges of hind shoes
from the toe back to quarters should be beveled off. The edges of front
shoes should be beveled off on both outside and inside.




                       XXV. A BAD SPEEDY CUTTER.


The late Freeman M. Dodge of Pittsfield, Mass., trainer and driver, had
a bay mare by the name of “Tillie Wilkes” that was speedy cutting so bad
that he was not able to work her, and he came to me to find out if I
could stop her from speedy cutting. I told him I could not tell until I
saw her driven. He brought her over and drove her down the stretch at a
three minute gait. This mare had a sore spot on the lower inside of one
hind ankle that was raw, the size of a silver dollar and when she began
touching this spot, speedy cutting, she would jump and begin running.
After seeing this mare driven I found she had excessive action in front
and very lofty, and her hind action mostly all stifle action and very
little hock action and her feet were in bad shape. She was driven over
the next day to be shod and I had her shoes ready when she arrived. I
fixed this mare’s front feet by lowering her quarters and heels as much
as nature would allow me, and left all the toe possible. This gave her a
longer leverage to leave the ground from, which kept her from breaking
over so quick, and it reduced her lofty knee action and created more
extension. I took off a twelve-ounce shoe from each of her front feet,
and applied a four-ounce aluminum shoe.

Fixing her hind feet and shoeing them was the most important. I
shortened the toes and lowered the inside of each hind foot until the
inside of them was as low as the outside or a shade lower if anything. I
fitted a pair of heavy sideweight shoes, the heavy side of the shoes on
the outside of the hind feet, each hind shoe weighed about eleven ounces
with heel calks. This job stopped all the speedy cutting and she trotted
quarters in 31 seconds shortly after, and was sold to Mr. Shults for
$750.00.




                          XXVI. GAITING COLTS.


Sometimes you will find a colt that has not much knee, hock or stifle
action and not much speed, and in such cases, to remedy the defect,
after the feet have been leveled the hind feet a shade shorter than the
front, I would recommend a heavy rolling toe shoe in front, eight, nine
or ten ounces and a little lighter one behind, two or three ounces
lighter. If the foot is large and the colt is strong, eleven ounces in
front to begin with. Now as the action increases, decrease the weight.
When the colt begins to make speed he or she will not need a rolling toe
shoe in front, a plain shoe is better, one that will not slip back on
leaving the ground. As the colt begins to make speed the action of the
legs needs watching because sometimes they will begin to show a faulty
line of action.

If they begin to get faulty they are liable to begin winging in or
paddling out, and when shod again the feet can be fixed to prevent this
way of going at speed. The most important thing is _fixing_ their feet
to prevent a faulty line of action for if the feet are not kept level
they will begin getting rough gaited and unsteady. One important thing
in fixing feet on yearlings to be shod and worked for speed is to keep
the quarters and heels of front feet as low as possible, it affords
comfort in landing and increases extension without carrying so much
weight. Colts that have a lot of action at both ends, hind and front,
need very light shoes all round, you can find out the proper balance
with a toe weight.

To increase extension, lower the quarters and heels and apply toe
weights instead of using so much in the shoe. The colt should carry a
natural head, not too high and not too low, the lower the better if he
is inclined to mix. If your colt is short and choppy gaited in his hind
action lower the quarters and heels of hind feet and shoe with a heavy
toeweight plain shoe and extend the shoe out one-quarter of an inch or
more in front of toe of hind foot. When the colt begins to make speed
decrease the weight of shoe of hind feet. Some youngsters require more
weight behind than in front to equalize action so as to work
harmoniously front and rear.

If you have a mixed-gaited colt and you want to make a trotter out of
him or her, keep plenty of foot on both hind and front feet, especially
at the toes. When fixing the feet to be shod cut or rasp the quarters
and heels of both front and hind feet as low as possible, keep plenty of
toe on front and hind feet. Usually you will find that the front feet
have the longest angle to leave the ground from, but by lowering the
quarters and heels of hind feet to get them as near as you can to the
same angle of the front feet, the more you will be confining the gait to
a pure trot, and there will be less danger of singlefooting or pacing.

I want my readers to distinctly understand that there is a set of pacing
feet for a pacer and a set of trotting feet for a trotter, especially at
the time when you are going to convert a trotter to the pace or a pacer
to the trot. That, however, will be explained later in this book. If
your trotting colt becomes mixed gaited or goes into a singlefoot or
pace, the first thing to do is to lower the quarters and heels of hind
feet as much as possible, keep all the toe on him you can and shoe with
a light shoe with toe and heel calks. The front feet should be lowered
in the same manner and add a few ounces more weight to front shoes and
allow your colt to be driven as low headed as is comfortable.

When you try this remedy for a mixed-gaited colt or horse you will be
surprised why you have not been able to find it out years ago.

The pacing youngster with not much of any kind of action at either end,
needs to go in short toes and heavy shoes all around and if the toes of
shoes are beveled or rolled it will be very good the first time shod.
After your pacing colt begins to make speed, shoe to prevent slipping at
both ends, with heel and toe calks on hind shoes. As a rule they go high
headed, it seems to suit the majority of pacers.

[Illustration:

  HORSE-SHOE STACK—ALLEN FARM, 1916.

  W. J. MOORE
]

If your pacer begins to cross-fire lower the inside of hind feet but if
you cannot lower the feet on the inside raise the outside with the
thickness of the shoe, thick on outside and thin on inside. If you can
lower the inside of hind feet low enough, a plain shoe will do with
calks. The best shoe for a cross-firing pacer is a heavy sideweight
shoe, thin and rounded off on the inside toe. You do not need any
_projections_ on this shoe, heel or toe, if the foot is properly
prepared to widen action. If your colt gets to winging to his knees,
lower the outside of front feet from centre of toes to heel on
_outside_. If your colt begins to paddle with one front leg or the
other, lower the inside of the foot or feet as much as they will stand,
this will leave the outside toe the longest to leave the ground from,
which, when at speed, will prevent a lot of paddling. The lighter the
shoes on a paddler the better, but if he has to carry some weight in his
shoes to balance action, put all the weight in the outside of his shoes.
If you use a toeweight, attach it near to the outside toe for better
results. Paddling is caused by the contraction of muscles on one side of
the leg, the same as winging in, and not always by bad shoeing, the main
thing is _foot fixing_.

Some say there is nothing under the sun perfect. Foals developing in the
womb of their dam sometimes will be in a cramped position, which
contracts those muscles or ligaments that cause winging in or paddling
out. As some of the yearlings and weanlings show this faulty line of
action before ever being shod. I have seen yearlings that were
knee-knockers to begin with and you would think confirmed ones and after
one, two or three shoeings you could not hear them knock their boots on
the turns, and they would later develop into fast trotters and win races
or take fast records at two and three years old.

At the Allen Farm, where I have been located for a great many years, I
have seen results obtained by foot fixing and shoeing that satisfied me
that there were secrets hidden from most of the public in the art or
science of foot fixing and balancing faulty action, and from my
experience and the results obtained, I felt that the public was entitled
to my knowledge so gained. I have seen yearlings step eighths of a mile
from 15¾ to 17 and 18 seconds, and many of them. I have seen a yearling
step the last sixteenth of an eighth in seven seconds, a 1:52 gait, on
this half-mile track which should go a second faster on a mile track.

Now if the foot fixing and shoeing that I have explained in this book
and have been practising for years is not the nearest approach to the
proper and correct way of balancing the action of the trotter and pacer,
why has Bingara become the champion fourteen-year-old sire of 2:30
performers, located as he is in this cold climate and far away from the
section where are the greatest number of producing dams? Mares by
Kremlin 2:07¾, the champion living brood mare sire of the world, have
produced wonderful results. Through these channels came Baden 2:05¼, a
trotting race horse that raced on both half-mile tracks and mile tracks
and was badly handicapped in many of his races by being scored ten,
twelve, fifteen, and as many as seventeen times before getting the word.
This scoring was not all done by one driver or one horse, but by
different drivers and different horses trying to break the horse’s heart
repeatedly, and when they could not rupture his legs, unhinge his back,
rattle his thinking box or break his heart, Mr. Geers and Mr. Cox, the
great race drivers, said that Baden 2:05¼ was the greatest race horse
ever seen. In all my experience with the produce of Bingara I have never
seen one yet that wanted to pace if looked after in his early education.
I know him to get trotters from pacing mares, and nothing but trotters
from all kinds of mares, his power to transmit the trotting gait to his
produce is something wonderful, and his only pacers are those that were
forced by the unsportsmanlike use of hopples.




                      XXVII. NEGLECTED HIND FEET.


The hind feet on both trotters and pacers are the worst neglected when
receiving their preparation in training and racing. Is your trotter or
pacer going rough gaited with his hind legs? Is your trotter hitting his
coronets, is he speedy cutting, is he hitting his shins or hocks? Is
your pacer hitting his front shoes, or cross-firing? All this unbalanced
action comes from an unbalanced, unprepared, and unweighted foot, most
times—nearly nine out of ten—from cutting the outside of hind foot too
low from center of toe back to outside heel leaving the inside the
highest, which will control the line of action of the leg after the foot
leaves the ground.

Lots of people do not know this and lots of horsemen do not know this
until they get into trouble and commence experimenting with some
fandangle shoes, long heels on one side and short heels on the opposite
side, or some projection on some part of shoes that creates strain and
friction trying to overcome a badly fixed foot or feet. If your trotter
or pacer is doing any of the above stunts, the insides of his hind foot
or feet are a lot too high for the outside. Cut the inside of hind feet
down as low as they will stand, low enough to change the angle of the
feet, to make the feet or angle longer to leave the ground from. If his
toes are the right length do not touch them.

The best shoe for your trotter in this case is a sideweight shoe, a
little heavier than he has been carrying—two or three ounces heavier.
The best shoe for the pacer is a sideweight, same as above and it can be
an ounce heavier than above, say four ounces heavier than he had been
carrying. After your trotter or pacer becomes purer gaited you can
dispense with this extra weight. Shoe light and as long as the foot or
feet are kept level and at the right poise and angle you will not have
any trouble. I do not recommend shoes with a long heel on one side and a
short one on an opposite side on a correctly or properly fixed foot, or
feet, for fast work or racing, because such shoes create undue friction
_at speed_. When a hind leg is extended and foot or feet are properly
fixed and balanced on the leg, both heels of the foot should strike the
ground at the _same time_. If the heel on one side of shoe is
three-quarter of an inch longer, or half inch longer, this long heel
hits the ground first, before the opposite heel hits, which is unnatural
and disagreeable to the bones of the feet, that work in sockets. It has
the tendency to shift the bearing of the bones in their sockets on
landing and leaving the ground, and gives extra work to the ligaments
that hold the bones in their sockets. On slow-going horses this long
outside heel does not affect them as severely as on horses that are
working fast or racing. You must remember when horses are going at a
fast pace they land on their heels as a rule with their toes elevated
away from the ground. This is one of the main reasons why the heels of
hind shoes should be the same length on both sides at _speed_ or taking
_fast_ work. There are lots of horses that would have been faster and
better race horses if their hind feet and action had been properly
balanced to work harmoniously with one another. The speed of a horse
depends largely on the propelling power of the hind quarters. The
muscles of the thigh, stifle and whirlbone need looking after in their
early preparation to keep the soreness out of them until they become
hardened. Do not work your horse on a slippery track, wait a day or you
may be sorry, if he is not eating skip a workout, it will suit the
horse.




                 XXVIII. KNEE ACTION WITHOUT EXTENSION.


Many horses have plenty of knee action and no extension. This horse is
carrying weight enough, and foot is prepared to make him knee up, but is
unbalanced both by the weight application and foot fixing to develop the
proper extension. The feet of a horse gaited in this manner need the
quarters and heels of front feet lowered as low as safety will permit,
do not touch the toes of front feet, place the front feet at as long an
angle to leave the ground from as possible, reduce the weight of the
front shoes and add it to the feet in a toe weight, and pull his head
down some if you have to use a standing martingale and let him come
along gradually.

Too much knee action is lost motion and tiresome. I found that out for
myself walking through the deep snows that we have up here in the
Berkshire Hills. Too much folding of the knees causes elbow hitting, and
at times when they do not reach their elbow some of them will hit on the
back of their arm. One of the worst speedy cutters I ever saw was gaited
in front in this manner. I decreased the knee and folding action,
changed the hind feet, which were very high on inside, lowered them and
shod with heavy outside weight shoe and she trotted clean and pure,
quarters in 31 seconds in May. She had one sore on her as large as a
silver dollar from hitting, and when she began hitting she would try and
run away.




           XXIX. HORSES THAT GET AWAY SLOW, BUT FINISH FAST.


In these cases I feel sorry for the horse also for the driver. The horse
knows he is handicapped, and the driver does not want to take any
desperate chances of getting shut out by trying to get away with the
field of starters, anyhow I will say, the horse is unbalanced to get
away, got a lot of speed but can not find it when it is needed. This
horse needs assistance in foot balancing and weighting. The front action
on this kind of a horse needs to be increased more for extension than
anything else, increase his extension and everything else will take care
of itself.

To help this horse to get away, I would change the angle of his front
feet, make the angle longer to leave the ground from. If the angle of
his front feet is at 54 or 55 degrees change it to 50 or 51, if it is at
52 or 53 degrees change it to 48 or 49 degrees, add three or four ounces
more weight to his front shoes and carry the same toe weight that he has
been carrying. In fixing his front feet do not touch or take anything
off his toes, shoe to prevent slipping, especially the hind feet. If
this horse has been carrying a light shoe in front—seven, eight or nine
ounces—it will require not less than four or five ounces more weight to
get away with his field. If this four or five ounces balances him to get
away with his field, he will not pull you hard to hold him together. If
this horse is not inclined to mix, I would have the toes of hind feet an
eighth or quarter inch shorter than those of the front feet and at an
angle of about 54 or 55 degrees, but if he is inclined to shift or mix
into a single foot, have the hind feet as near the same length and angle
as the front feet as possible, the nearer the better. If it takes two or
three ounces more weight to balance faulty action, use it, put it on his
feet, if you don’t you will wear him out pulling on him, you will make
him muscle-sore propelling against your strong arms, pulling 100 or 150
pounds on the bit. It creates a terrible strain going the last quarter
of a fast mile, especially on youngsters, and some trainers wonder why
some of their pupils don’t go on and develop speed, and wonder why some
of them become so tired after passing the three-quarter pole. No matter
how royally bred they are, they need to be properly balanced to go the
distance on as light a pull on the bit as possible. If you depend on
balancing them by holding them together by pulling against their jaws
you are a back number for a youngster or aged horse is not doing his
work in comfort and with ease going against a heavy pull on the bit.
There is nothing that will wear out a yearling, two-year-old or
three-year-old quicker than hard pulling against the bit, for it
over-taxes the muscles of the propelling power caused by being
unbalanced. Their propelling muscles will stand it for a while, but not
for long. If you can get your colt or horse properly balanced he will
not pull you, he would rather go at speed in comfort and ease to himself
than to get unhinged in the back propelling against a heavy pull on the
lines. The trainers that can detect or locate faulty action and know
what to do to remedy the same are the ones that make a success of
developing, conditioning and driving in races. It takes judgment, a good
eye and ear to detect faulty action. It takes an expert to detect a
badly fixed foot that was intended to help the line of action.




                    XXX. TO CONVERT A PACER TO TROT.


Begin by fixing his feet, cut or rasp the quarters and heels of all four
feet down as low as possible without getting any sole pressure against
the shoes that are fitted. Have the length of toes as near alike as the
case will permit, I mean by not taking anything off the toes of front
feet or hind feet, supposing the toes are near alike, he will need all
the toe possible to convert him to the trot from the pace. Shoe front
feet with a heavy toe weight shoe, it may take fifteen or seventeen
ounces. If you have to use any toe weight while going slow it is best to
weld spur on toe of shoe and use a toe weight fitted to the spur. It is
best in this case, in order to convert the pacer to trot, to have a grab
on the front shoes. Shoe the hind feet with a light shoe with toe and
heel calk, drive him as low headed as possible even if you have to use a
standing martingale, bring him along slow, by degrees, for as it effects
a change of muscles it is something new to the horse and the more time
you take in bringing along trotting, the more you will be perfecting the
gait. Don’t hurry matters. After a few weeks he will have more growth of
foot and can lower his quarters and heels a little more giving his feet
a longer angle to leave the ground from. In converting a pacer to trot,
a four-inch toe is not too long on some horses, but on yearlings and
two-year-olds their feet will be shorter, but the closer you get the
angle of front and hind feet to 50 or 51 degrees with same length of
toes hind and front, the better, to confine him to the trot, and keep
him trotting. In some cases the angle needs to be 48 or 49 degrees in
front, and as near to that as you can get the hind feet.




                XXXI. CONVERTING A TROTTER TO THE PACE.


Shorten and lower the toes of all four feet, do not touch the quarters
or heels of front or hind feet. The weight of the shoes will vary on
different horses. On a youngster I would put a five or six-ounce
concaved shoe in front, and about nine or ten ounces behind, with toe
and heel calk. On an older horse the weight at both front and hind can
be correspondingly heavier, about eight ounces front and eleven or
twelve ounces, with heel and toe calks behind. Now when hitched ready to
go for the first lesson, check the head as high as the horse or colt can
carry it without causing pain and misery to the neck. If he paces any, a
half mile up to a mile and a half is enough for the first three or four
lessons. If he acts good do not let him go too fast for the first week
or ten days, you must take two or three weeks before asking him to step.
The angle of the front feet should be about 55 degrees and the angle of
the hind feet should be about 59 degrees.

Some horses that go into a singlefoot or strike a pace occasionally can
be easily converted to the pace by shoeing light in front and heavier
behind, from three to five ounces more weight in each hind shoe than he
is carrying in his front shoes. If he does not take to the pace readily
add more weight to hind shoes, and bevel or roll the toes of shoes, and
check head higher. You need a short natural foot all around to convert
to the pace. The angle of the feet will vary according to their
pasterns. If the horse has a long oblique pastern, shorten the toes hind
and front as much as they will allow to be safe, and do not touch the
heels.

I used this method of converting Joe Patchen II from the trot to the
pace, and many others. They could not make him strike a pace and after
fixing his feet and shoeing him he went out on the track and paced an
eighth of a mile in eighteen seconds after having been driven at the
trot for over a year.




                        XXXII. CONTRACTED HEELS.


To expand a contracted foot or quarter the first thing to do is to get
the foot soft by poulticing or stuffing with “Whiterock” for a couple of
nights. Use hoof expanders that are stronger than the hoof, some feet
are so strong and stiff at the quarters that the foot has to be weakened
between the bars and frog so that the expanders will expand it. If you
want the inside quarter expanded leave the last two heel nails out of
the inside of shoe, put a toe clip on shoe and a clip back at the
outside heel and do just the reverse to expand an outside quarter. In
this way you will be getting all the expansion on the contracted
quarter. If this shoe is fitted so that the expander can be placed in
the foot after the shoe has been nailed on, the contracted quarter will
be expanded over a quarter of an inch before the shoe is clinched up.
Nails should not be used back towards the heels of a contracted foot
that is to be expanded. When the foot expands wider than the shoe, reset
shoes and renew the position of expander to act stronger. The softer you
keep the feet the faster they will spread, do not let them get dry and
hard. The expansion you get in the foot of a yearling or a two or
three-year-old can be kept after the expander has been discarded by not
allowing the heels to be kept too high for too long a time. But in aged
horses that have had contracted feet or quarters for years and have
become set, you can expand the feet or quarters, and when you stop using
the expanders the heels and quarters will contract right back to where
they were before, in the majority of cases. In cases of this kind in
aged horses after the feet have been expanded the quarters should be cut
down low and the coronets blistered on both inside and outside quarters.

There are lots of horses with contracted heels and the heels become so
high from the coronet to the shoe bearing surface and have stayed this
way for such a length of time that they cannot be cut down without
hurting or injuring the horse, until after the feet have been expanded.
The sensitive part of the foot gets a long ways down from the coronet in
a contracted foot, and to cut or lower the quarters and heels to place
the foot at a proper angle, it cannot be done until the foot is
expanded. The more you expand the foot the lower you can cut or rasp
down the heels. The more you expand the heels the higher up you are
driving the sensitive interior of the foot at the quarters. In many aged
horses after the feet are expanded it will be well to continue the use
of expanders, to prevent contraction, for a period of six or twelve
months.




                   XXXIII. CAUSE OF CONTRACTED HEELS.


A disease called Thrush, located in and about the frog is sure to
contract the heels of a foot, if not cured quickly. A foot troubled with
thrush should be cured when first discovered, if not the frog keeps
perishing away until there is not enough of it there to hold or keep the
heels from contracting. Another cause is allowing feet to grow too high
at the heels and letting them remain too high for too long a time. When
the heels get too high the frog is too far away from the ground to get
any expansion, or to prevent contraction. The closer the frog is kept to
the ground on a horse running in pasture or shod and working, all the
better. Stock running in pasture, young or old, should have their feet
rasped down regularly every five or six weeks at the longest. Some may
need it oftener than that. This fixing of feet on stock running out,
assists expansion and prevents contraction. If the feet are allowed to
grow too long on stock running in pasture the position the animal has to
stand in while grazing, with one leg out in front of the other will
contract or curl the inside quarter of each front foot, and wing out the
outside quarter. Shoes staying on too long, and horses kept on dry, hard
floors where they do not get any moisture, will cause contraction. The
feet of horses kept on dry hard floors should be stuffed at least every
other night with clay, or whiterock, or something of a moistening
nature. Contraction is the main cause of both quartercracks and corns.
To cure Thrush, cleanse the frog thoroughly, then a few applications of
dry powdered calomel to the frog will dry the disease up and leave the
frog healthy.




                             XXXIV. CORNS.


A live, painful corn is caused by different things. High contracted
heels will cause corns as well as short ones. Shoeing and leaving the
shoes on too long, and undue concussion will cause corns. The majority
of cases of corns will be found in contracted feet. I find the most
successful way to treat corns is to get the foot or feet soft and keep
them soft. Shoe with a bar shoe, lower the heels so as you can get all
the frog pressure possible on the bar of the shoe, after the shoe has
been fitted, and before nailing to the foot, cut the heel bearing away
from the shoe where the corn is located, an inch of the bearing surface
ahead of the corn and half an inch or more away from the shoe to break
the jar and reduce the concussion. If foot is contracted use an expander
inserted in foot before shoe is fitted, and keep foot soft. I do not
recommend cutting the bars and sole away where the corn is located and
leaving the wall standing up all alone, but cut the whole heel seat of
corn and bar down _flat_, away from the bearing surface of shoe.




                     XXXV. TOE CRACK OR SPLIT FOOT.


A foot with a toe crack should be kept as short as possible at the toe.
Apply a stiff hoof expander, use one or two rivets or clamps as high up
and as near the coronet as possible after cutting the horn where one
side laps over the other the full length of the crack. After inserting
the hoof expander fit a bar shoe to the foot with a clip at each side of
the toe, and before nailing shoe to foot cut the bearing of foot away
from the shoe across the toe. If the foot is not contracted any I would
recommend a clip back at each heel. Treat the same as is prescribed for
Quartercrack, after cutting away half inch each side of crack at the
coronet. If foot is contracted do not use any clips back at the heels
and keep the foot soft.




                          XXXVI. QUARTERCRACK.


A quartercrack is a split or crack in a quarter from the coronet down
towards the bottom of a foot. At times it is very painful and prevents
the use of the horse. In most of these quartercracks one side is lapped
over on the other one-quarter or three-eighths of an inch, and from the
continual expansion and contraction of the foot while the horse is in
action the lapped parts are continually working against one another as
the foot expands with the weight of horse on it, and contracts when the
foot is lifted up. This kind of action of the split horn at the coronet
is what prevents it from knitting. The first thing to do is to apply a
few poultices which will get the foot soft. If the foot or quarter is
contracted apply a hoof expander. In fixing the foot rasp the foot as
low as possible without making it tender, at both heels and toes. Do not
cut any sole or bars out or cut the heels open with the knife, have the
side of foot where the crack is on the lowest or you can have that part
of the shoe quite thin, so that the jar or concussion will be on all
parts of foot, except the quartercrack. Use a bar shoe with plenty of
frog pressure, a plain shoe is best. If you have to have calks, place
the heel calk on cracked side ahead of crack on shoe if possible. If the
crack is close to the heel, take the bearing of foot away from the shoe
by cutting the heel down. Now cut the horn away on the side that is
lapped over the other the full length of the quartercrack, cut the horn
away one-quarter of an inch each side of the crack at the coronet, if it
bleeds a little it will not hurt. Now a blister at the coronet above and
on each side of the crack will be beneficial to start the growth down
solid, if it should crack open again apply a stronger one. After the
crack starts to grow down solid, apply a little of the blistering
ointment every week or ten days but do not let it blister, just use
enough to keep it sweating, it will toughen and soften the horn as it
grows down. A rivet or clamp drawing the edges of crack together as near
the coronet as possible, to hold it together and strengthen it will be
very beneficial. A salve or ointment formally made by the late Geo. W.
St. Clair, and now by Mike Bowerman, of Lexington, Ky., is the best
thing I have seen to help knit and grow down a quartercrack. A little
North Carolina tar rubbed into coronet over crack every other day I find
is excellent.




                     XXXVII. DISHED OR SCOOPED TOE.


This is caused by allowing feet to grow too long, especially on colts
and horses in training, creating undue pressure and strain on the front
of foot on breaking over to leave the ground. It is also caused by being
foundered, where the soles of feet have dropped, and also where the
fever has settled in the feet, and the soles have not dropped, but are
inclined to be contracted, dry and hard, and kept at the wrong angle,
and feet not kept properly fixed and shoes not properly fitted. The
remedy for this is to fix the foot at the proper angle, keep the frog
close to the ground. Pare the sole a little thin around the toe from the
point of frog out to the wall at the toe, and after the shoe has been
fitted, cut the bearing of the foot at the toe away from the shoe. A few
shoeings of this kind will prevent the toe from turning up.




                          XXXVIII. CONCUSSION.


Horses with high knee action hit the ground the hardest. The more weight
a horse carries in his shoes or toe weights, the more concussion he
receives. The concussion on the hind feet and legs does not seem to pain
or sting anything like what he has to endure in the front feet and legs
when striking the ground fast and hard, especially when he is going over
a hard piece of ground. If his front feet are out of proportion, high
heels and long toes, dry and hard, he will feel the concussion severely
and this will make many horses unsteady, breaking and acting bad. A
horse with lofty forward action should be trained in a natural low
quarter and low heeled foot, with a bar shoe as light as possible, with
frog pressure.

The most dangerous and uncomfortable kind of a foot for a horse that
hits the ground hard to have is one with the heels abnormally high. The
higher the heels the greater the concussion. The lower the heels the
less the concussion. The more weight the more concussion. The less
weight the less concussion. A foot that is kept at the proper angle, as
near to a natural foot as possible, and kept soft, will prevent the
stinging and painful sensation that is caused by concussion. With feet
kept like this the horse will not flinch or shorten up in his stride
when he strikes hard places in the track. The light thin heel calks that
are used on shoes do not break much of the concussion when horses are
going fast. Why? because when the legs are extended at speed the shoes
land on the ground back on the heel, with the toe of the foot elevated
away from the ground, and with some horses more than with others. They
do not strike the ground flat-footed like the most of them do when going
slow. Thin hard pads are very good under light shoes, but thick pads
that will allow the walls of a horse’s foot at heels to sink or cut
through them at the heels are no good. They will create a hard lump at
the seat of corns between the bar and wall at the heels, and hold dirt
that is liable to create unpleasant feelings to a sensitive horse that
goes in middling low heels. When heels of the front feet are allowed to
become too high on horses taking fast work or racing, a very severe
strain is thrown on the ligament or tendon that holds the navicular bone
in its socket. When the leg is extended at speed the extra high heels
cause the foot to land too far ahead of the leg while the toe is
elevated on landing, so that it creates an extra amount of work for the
ligament to hold it in its proper position at the time of impact with
the ground.




           XXXIX. FOUNDER, CHRONIC LAMINITIS OR DROPPED SOLE.


There is only one way to shoe this kind for comfort to the animal, and
for an earning remuneration for the owner. In founder or chronic
laminitis, where the sole of feet are dropped, caused by the
displacement of the weight-bearing bones of the foot, fix the feet by
lowering the quarters and heels so as to get as much frog pressure as is
possible, without making the foot tender, and your foot is ready for the
shoe. A shoe for a dropped sole foot must be a bar shoe, thick at the
toe and thin at the heels, with a wide thin bar to receive the frog
pressure. To make a shoe to suit this kind of diseased feet, use a piece
of iron three-quarters to one inch square according to the nature of the
disease and the weight of the horse, and in making the shoes for foot
founder leave all the thickness of the shoe at the toe possible, and
thin the shoe at the quarters and heels to a quarter of an inch, have
the bar wide and thin so as to receive all the frog pressure possible,
the thicker the toe of shoe and thinner the quarters and bar at heels
the better. Concave or cup the shoe out so as not to get any sole
pressure.

I will cite one case of this kind, the very worst in my experience. A
horse that weighed over 1400 pounds that could scarcely stand on his
feet, had been treated by different veterinary surgeons and shod several
times and could not keep the shoes on his feet and he was so sore that I
got wet with perspiration getting two nails in one shoe and I had to
stand him in a very soft place to do that. This horse would lay down in
the lot most all the time and eat the grass from where he could reach it
and then move to where he could reach more, he was the most hopeless
subject I ever came across. I shod him according to the instruction
herein prescribed, and he trotted off with his tail curled over his back
like a colt. He was put to work the next morning and continued at work
until sold for two hundred dollars. Elevating the heels with calks
creates pain and misery to the animal.




                        XL. CROSS-FIRING PACERS.


When a pacer begins to cross-fire every one knows he is not balanced.
There are different causes for cross-firing: front feet not properly
fixed and at the proper angle, not carrying the proper amount of weight
in front will help to cause it, and on hind feet the same. Too much
slipping will help to create it. But the most important thing that
causes cross-firing, nine times out of ten, is because the hind feet are
a lot higher on the inside than they are on the outside, which creates a
leverage to leave the ground from when at speed, which extra height or
length of foot acts as a leverage to control the line of action of the
leg after the foot leaves the ground. In all my experience with
cross-firers I have found this the most important factor, namely, the
inside of the offending feet to be the highest. So the fixing of the
feet is the most important part of the contract. If you can get the feet
properly fixed to change the leverage, to control the line of action,
there will be no more cross-firing. (This same rule applies to a trotter
that is unbalanced if the insides of his hind feet are the highest and
when he strikes a singlefoot or pace he is very likely to cross-fire).
The pacer that begins to cross-fire needs the insides of the hind feet
lowered, a little longer angle to leave the ground from, with the height
or extra length of foot to create a leverage on leaving the ground to be
at the outside toe. A foot properly fixed as herein prescribed and a
properly made and fitted shoe will stop cross-firing. I would recommend
a sideweight shoe, the weight to be applied to the outside of feet, the
inside to be beveled or rounded from center of toe back to the inside
quarter of each hind shoe. The shoes could be a few ounces heavier than
previous shoes for best results. As a rule pacers go best and fastest in
shorter feet than the trotters. The easier a pacer can leave the ground
the more rapid gaited he will be, and the more he will be inclined to
stick to the pace. By all means shoe to prevent slipping both in front
and behind. A proper angle for the front feet has to be found, also for
the hind feet, so that the speed at both ends will be in harmony, if one
end is faster than the other there will be friction.

There will be found in this work directions as to how to lengthen or
shorten the stride, to increase or decrease knee or hock action, to
widen hind action, also the best way to prevent winging in and paddling
out, at speed. Also how to quicken the action of dwelling gaited ones.
As to the proper amount of weight that the horse goes the fastest with
in his shoes, the trainer should know better than any one else, but all
trainers are not the best judges of gait, an expert on the ground taking
a view from in front, from behind, and a side view, has a big advantage
over the driver. An expert trainer and race driver knows when his pupil
can step a mile, half or three-quarters at a 2:10 or 2:05 or a 2:00 gait
on a light line, that his horse is all right, if there is any friction
he can see it or feel it on the lines.




                        XLI. NOTE OF IMPORTANCE.


Now right here is the most important part of a little transaction that
should not be omitted from any trainer’s records. The condition your
horse has worked up to and how he has been cared for, his weight,
whether he wears calks or not, what is the angle of his feet and length
of toes front and hind, what is the weight of his front shoes also his
hind shoes, also about his harness, the exact length of back strap and
check rein, and what hole the buckle belongs in the check rein should be
carefully noted. If you keep a record of these things no one can tell
you what your horse needs, for you will know it yourself far better. If
a change takes place and it is not physical, it may have occurred in the
shop if he has been shod recently, and as you have kept a record of his
feet and shoes and harness you can find out by reference to it.

The last time I was in Lexington, Ky. I was working at my trade, shoeing
horses, when I was approached by a gentleman by the name of Saunders, he
said to me that he was told by some of his friends to see me about
shoeing a cross-firing pacer that he had and he also said that I was
recommended to him very highly. I told him I could tell him what I could
do for the horse after seeing the condition of the feet, if I could help
him or not, so he had the horse led around to my tent to be looked at.
After looking at the feet and shoeing, I told him I could help that
horse wonderfully, so the next day my subject was led around for me to
operate on. I had learned that this horse cross-fired so bad they could
hardly keep quarter-boots on him, and they were afraid to work him on
account of cross-firing. He was entered to start at the meeting but was
a little short of work. His feet were in bad shape according to the
calipers and foot adjuster and to my eye. I fixed this horse’s feet to
pace without cross-firing and truly, according to the prescription given
in this book for cross-firing. That horse responded to the treatment
instantly and the horse paced fine with no more cross-firing. He was
worked a couple of times during the week and went all right, and during
the meeting he was going so good they agreed to start him. He started in
the race and if my memory serves me right he finished second the first
heat, the second heat several horses finished ahead of him, I do not
remember how many, but when they came out for the third heat the driver
of this horse was called up in the stand to watch this horse while a
driver by the name of Mike Bowerman piloted him to victory in three
straight heats and he took a record close to 2:10. I believe the horse’s
name was Sable Gift, or some other gift. The only gift the horse got was
a record, something he did not want, neither did those that were buying
first, second and third choices.




                       XLII. KEEP THE FEET LEVEL.


The front foot should never be the highest on the outside of a trotter
or pacer, unless the horse paddles with one or both front legs. A foot
that is left high on the outside and low on the inside will help to
prevent paddling and will increase the winging in to the knees. A foot
that is kept high on the inside and low on the outside will help to
prevent winging in to the knees. There are lots of paddlers who do not
begin to paddle until the foot has left the ground quite some distance,
and to prove this I have seen the shoes worn by some paddlers and the
most of the wear on the shoes of the paddling leg or legs was at the
outside toe of shoe. A paddler that leaves the ground from the inside
toe of shoe can be made to carry the leg straighter in a line at speed
easier than one that leaves the ground from the outside toe.

The reason why a front foot should not be left highest on the outside,
of a trotter or pacer, unless he is a paddler, is this; supposing the
front legs at the chest or where the upper arm joint is connected with
the chest is ten, twelve or fifteen inches apart, I mean the distance
the two front legs are from one another where connected with the body.
Now when this horse is at speed and can go fast at the trot or pace,
like most all fast horses at speed, his foot prints will be straight in
a line one after the other on the track. Now if their upper arms are ten
or twelve inches apart, more or less, and at speed their feet land
nearly on a line, the front legs are not working forward and backward in
a straight up and down line from the body, so this being the case just
try to imagine just how those two front feet land on the ground with the
legs wide apart at the upper arms and the feet landing straight in a
line or nearly so at speed. The question is, should the outside of front
foot be lower than the inside, if so, how much, to distribute and
equalize the concussion on both sides of a front foot at the heels _when
at speed_. What I am trying to explain is, if you have a fast trotter or
pacer and he does not paddle, and you are working to develop speed
intending to race, and if the outside of the front feet are the highest
and the inside of the hind feet are the highest, every time you work
this horse with unbalanced feet you are guilty of one of the greatest
crimes that are committed by trainers and horse-shoers.

In fixing the front feet on all fast horses, trotters or pacers, that do
not paddle, first rasp the outside of a front foot down to where you
want it, toe and heel, then you can rasp the inside of the foot down to
where it will suit the action of the leg the best. The reason for this
is you can always lower the inside of a front foot a lot lower than you
can the outside of same foot and when you rasp the inside of a front
foot down _first_, nine times out of ten you will not be able to rasp
the outside of the same foot down to a level with the inside. Now the
hind foot is just to the reverse. Always rasp to lower the inside of a
hind foot down first to where you want it and then take the outside down
to a level with it. If you do not fix feet by this rule, the sensitive
portion of the foot will often prevent you from lowering it enough to
level up matters with opposite side, and the sensitive parts of the foot
that will prevent you from doing this will be the outside of a front
foot and the inside of a hind foot. This is the main reason why so many
floormen in shops all over the country cut the inside of front feet too
low for the outside, and leave the inside of the hind feet too high for
the outside of same. But if you will fix feet by this rule you will be
right the most of the time.




                  XLIII. PULLING ON ONE LINE AT SPEED.


I was approached on this subject and had it explained to me that a
certain horse going the right way of the track at speed would go on one
line and keep going into the fence or hugging the pole, and would make
two or three breaks going the length of the stretch on a half-mile
track, and could not be kept away from the fence. After an examination
of the teeth, cheeks, and tongue, and bit, and finding these to be all
O. K., I concluded that it must be from uneven extension of the legs.
The extension and propelling power of the off legs was greater than that
of the nigh ones. A three-ounce toe weight on the feet of the nigh legs
straightened or balanced up the lost action of the nigh side so that the
horse would speed the length of the stretch in any position on the track
without pulling on one line and so the necessity for pulling on one line
to keep the horse straight was stopped.

The feet on this animal were well fixed hind and front, as to length of
toes and angle of feet, the hind shoes weighed alike and the front ones
also. The muscular development of the extension power of the off legs
was stronger than that of the nigh legs, perhaps also the propelling
power of the off hind leg. This is the reason the horse was pulling on
one line. The off legs were reaching farther than the nigh ones, which
kept forcing the horse to go towards the fence. Unbalanced feet will
cause this as well as undeveloped muscles. I have no doubt but there are
lots of horses going on one line and hugging the pole that need a change
in the angle of the feet, or the proper weight at the proper place to
balance up matters. If the strides of this horse had been measured there
would have been found a big difference between the off and nigh strides,
so you see it is not always the teeth, cheeks, or bit that cause this
trouble. The horse in question later stepped miles in 2:09.




                      XLIV. A GOOD JUDGE OF GAIT.


In all my experience with horsemen and horses I believe William Russell
Allen’s judgment about gait and prospective or ultimate speed is
superior to that of any one I have ever come in contact with. He seems
to have the faculty of knowing at a glance the frictionless gait from a
fairly good gaited one. To prove this I will cite a few instances. On
one occasion he was away on a visit and on his return he said to me that
he saw Uhlan 1:58 as a two-year-old or a three-year-old, I do not
remember exactly, but it was before he came into prominence, and Mr.
Allen told me he was the best gaited colt he ever saw. This colt must
have been just as he said, for it could not have been over a year, or
two at the outside, when this same colt trotted to a world’s record, and
it did not surprise me much after remembering what Mr. Allen told me
about his gait. The same thing happened again when he saw Peter Volo
2:02, early in his two-year-old form. Also the full sister to Peter
Volo, Volga, Mr. Allen told me she was gaited to win all her
engagements.

Here at Allen Farm he picked a yearling out of about thirty early in the
season, that was out of a non-producing dam, to beat all the yearlings
an eighth of a mile at the trot that season at the farm on a small bet.
It was big odds and was taken very quickly by one of the employees, who
was wishing he could get more of that kind of bets. When the brush work
of the season was over the field ticket was never presented to the pool
seller to be cashed. Mr. Allen’s first choice out of a large field won
by a quarter of a second and we had a lot of fast ones, but any how he
had the laugh on me at the finish.




                            XLV. BAR SHOES.


If you have a horse with toe cracks, quarter cracks or one that is sore
or lame from corns, a bar shoe is the best kind of a shoe. If you have a
horse with a dropped sole, or founder footed horse the bar shoe is the
best kind for such feet. It is also a good shoe to be used on feet where
expanders are used as the bar in the shoe will protect the expander at
times when an open shoe will not, and frog pressure on the bar will also
help to get expansion. The most important thing to guard against is, do
not drive any nails back of the quarters because that will prevent
expansion. Draft horses with wide low heels or thin soles require bar
shoes for the hard roads, as they stay sound longer wearing bar shoes
than in open shoes. For racing purposes the bar shoe is very important
for the front feet, and occasionally for the hind feet, for both trotter
and pacer. Any horse racing or in training that carries a light, or very
light front shoe should by all means wear a bar shoe, it is a great
support to the foot when hitting the ground hard and fast, as the
natural expansion and contraction is at its limit while going at a fast
rate of speed.

For a heel weight shoe you can get more weight in the heels of a bar
shoe than in an open shoe, which heel weight the action of some horses
requires more so than they do toe weight. A trotter or pacer that
spreads his hind shoes or front shoes, should by all means wear bar
shoes. The last time I shod John R. Gentry for Mr. James Ramey, I shod
him with bar shoes all around with heel and toe calks for that memorable
race at Detroit in the 2:13 or 2:14 class, he won his race easily
breaking the track record, under strong restraint. He could have paced a
very fast mile or two that day if he had been asked to do it, he was
sold after this performance.

I have never seen many yearlings or two-year-olds that needed a bar shoe
while in training. It is a very bad shoe for either yearling or
two-year-old unless a hoof expander is kept in the foot to prevent
contraction and help expansion, for the feet will surely get contracted
without something to prevent it, after the heels grow high enough to
lose their frog pressure. I used a pair of heavy heel weight bar shoes,
about ten or eleven ounce, on one yearling’s hind feet to stop forging
and scalping while he was being jogged every day. The shoes he was
brushed or speeded in for about ten days did not suit him for jogging.
This yearling trotted eighths in 17¼ seconds, a 2:18 gait. I tried more
weight in front but it did no good.




                  XLVI. SLIPPING OR SLIDING TOO MUCH.


Slipping will unbalance a horse when trying to get on his stride at
speed; slipping too much on landing or on leaving the ground creates
lost action that cannot be overcome by muscular development. I will cite
a couple of cases here to prove this. A horse that trotted in his work
miles in 2:27 over a half-mile track, when shipped to Rigley, Portland,
Me., could not trot a mile there in 2:45 without being very unsteady,
and this over a mile track. I examined his foot prints and saw he was
slipping too much. I calked his shoes with toe and heel calks, never
changed his feet, and this horse trotted miles in 2:25 without a break.

A mare that was trotting miles in her work over this same half-mile
track in 2:25 easily, quarters in 33 or 33½ seconds, was shipped to
Portland, Me., to a mile track and could not trot a mile there in 2:40
without mixing and acting very unsteady. On examining her foot prints I
found she was slipping too much. I was sure her feet were fixed
properly. As she became very unsteady and inclined to mix, I added two
ounces more to her front shoes and gave her a heel and toe calk on hind
and front shoes and she became very steady the next workout, and the
driver told me she could trot a mile in 2:16 or better.

After the drivers of those two horses found they would get all
unbalanced trying to get on their stride, they did not go to work with
the lines and whip endeavoring to balance up matters, and cruelly abuse
the dumb animals for what they were not responsible, but asked me to
take a look at them. This thing of balancing faulty action with the
lines and whip is a thing of the past, and he who thinks it can be done
has stopped, he may be one of the know-alls and if so is past redemption
and will have to be regenerated to be successful at the profession.




                        XLVII. SIDEWEIGHT SHOES.


Sideweight shoes are used with good results on horses that wing in to
their knees or knee hitters. Apply the weighty side of shoe on the
inside of foot, fix the outside of the foot from the center of toe to
the outside heel the lowest, it will be good in some cases to have the
outside web of shoe only one-half as thick as that of the inside, the
thinner the outside the better for the winging in. For paddling out the
sideweight shoe is used with the weight on the outside of the foot, be
sure and fix the foot by lowering the inside of foot from center of toe
back to the inside heel, have the inside of foot lower than the outside
for a paddler, and have the outside of foot lower than the inside for a
_front shin_, knee and arm hitter. A hind foot has to be fixed the
lowest on the inside for speedy cutting, shin and hock hitting. A
sideweight shoe is used a lot for speedy cutting, shin and hock hitting,
but if the feet can be properly leveled low enough on the insides, many
horses will go clean, or good gaited without the sideweight shoe, as it
is the extra high inside of hind feet that causes the closing up of the
hind action that makes all the trouble.

In many cases to help matters as to speedy cutting, shin and hock
hitting the front action has to be examined. The horse may have too much
or not enough front action to work in harmony with the hind action. If
he is going too high or lofty I would reduce the lost lofty action and
increase the extension. If he is going too low I would increase his
front action by shortening his toes and adding several ounces more
weight, sometimes it will require from four to six ounces more weight.
To reduce the high or lofty front action and create more extension lower
the quarters and heels of front feet, shoe with an extra light bar shoe
and have the foot at an angle of from 48 to 50 degrees. In making this
change you will get immediate results, and if necessary you can also
experiment with a toe weight to balance up matters more satisfactorily.




                       XLVIII. TOE WEIGHT SHOES.


A toeweight shoe is used with good results on front feet to increase the
fold of the knee, more height and reach. This shoe can be used with a
square, round, beveled or sharp toe, or with a grab toe calk as the case
calls for. If your horse is inclined to mix and needs weight to go good
gaited, the sharp toe or one with a grab on it is best. To shorten the
stride, shorten the toes of feet and square or bevel the toes of the
shoe but do not lower the heel any. By increasing the weight of this
shoe and raising the heels you can increase the height of the front
action to your liking. To lengthen the stride in using this shoe, lower
quarters and heels of the front feet to an angle of 48 to 50 degrees and
use the plain toeweight shoe or one with a grab on it. This toeweight
shoe is the best to use on a trotter that is hitching, hopping or
running behind, and when carrying one hind leg between the front ones.
Bevel this shoe from a little to the outside center of toe around the
inside to the quarter or near the heel with a small heel calk. This shoe
must be from one to two ounces more than twice the weight of the shoe
carried on the perfect gaited leg. If the good gaited leg is carrying a
six-ounce shoe this faulty gaited leg or foot will have to carry 13
ounces, not less, to change the line of action, 14 ounces will be better
than 12 ounces, but the hind foot will have to be the lowest on the
inside, if anything, as it was a high inside of foot that first started
the trouble. A horse that is hitching should not be speeded until the
action or gait of the faulty leg has been balanced, for it is so easily
done. A driver who will try and drive the hitching out of a horse with
the lines and whip is just as much unbalanced as is the dumb animal.




                         XLIX. POCKET WEIGHTS.


A pocket weight can be used jogging a knee knocker or paddler in the
fall, winter and spring, to develop the muscle required and to prevent
those faulty lines of action, and you can use from five to ten ounces,
as the case may need to the foot of the faulty gaited leg. But be sure
and shoe the foot or feet _very light_, and prepare the feet according
to the chapter in this book on winging in or paddling out. If the feet
are not properly prepared to help the pocket weight to control the
faulty line of action, one will be working against the other, and the
results will be unsatisfactory, but if properly performed as to foot
fixing and weighting, and a little time to bring about the change
results will be good. The hole in foot to receive the spur of the pocket
weight should be about half way between toe and heel to get best
results. The pocket weight should be used on inside of foot for winging
in and on outside of foot for a paddler.




                    L. ANKLE HITTING OR INTERFERING.


There are so many different causes for this that there is no fixed rule
in shoeing that will apply to all cases. I have seen horses cutting
their hind ankles from the following causes: the foot or feet too high
on the inside, the foot or feet too high on the outside, the foot or
feet too long at the toe, and too low at the heels, all out of
proportion as to the correct angle. Horses that are weak, low in flesh,
and worked beyond their physical capacity, when not able to perform
their daily task without getting leg weary, conformation of some horses
makes them brush, box, or cut their hind ankles.

The conformation that makes a very bad ankle hitter is one where the
horse stands wedge shaped from his hips down to where his feet rest on
the ground. This kind of a horse will stand with his hind feet close
together or against one another when at rest, horses of this
conformation and without much hock action are the very worst in this
respect. The same treatment will not apply to all cases of ankle
hitting. Unbalanced feet are the main cause for all ankle hitting, when
not caused by some deformity. A farrier with a good eye and good
judgment, on examination of the hind feet, will find out the main cause
of the trouble. Keep the toes of all ankle hitters as short as possible
for the shorter the leverage to break over and leave the ground from,
the straighter the line of action of the leg will be; a middling high
heel, and a very short toe is the best. If the foot or feet are too high
on the inside, lower the insides to a level with the outside, and shoe
with a heel calk, hot rasp the inside of shoes to a bevel. If you find
the foot or feet too high on the outside lower the outside to a level
with the inside, if either foot is winged out, wider on one side of the
leg than the other, edge the foot up until you have an equal portion of
the foot on both sides of the frog measuring from the center of the
frog. This rule applies to all feet in foot fixing. Shoe the same as
above stated.

I have seen horses cutting their ankles very bad on account of their
heels being too low, and their toes too long. I have stopped this kind
of ankle cutting by raising their heels with a side heelcalk
seven-eighths of an inch high and no toe calk. An ankle cutter, on
account of the inside of feet being too low, and where I could not cut
the outside of foot low enough to compare with the inside, I have got
good results by welding a calk along the inside of the hind shoe or
shoes between the first and third inside nails to make up the
deficiency. A horse that boxes his ankles jogging sluggishly will go
good in short toes, with a square toe shoe and heel calks.

A horse that cuts his ankles should not be checked too high but should
go in a natural manner without being made to carry his head too high.
The hold-back straps should never be too tight for this hugs their
quarters together and that creates interfering. A horse that is a hard
puller on the lines, when hitched to a light vehicle has a tendency to
box his ankles on account of the hold-back straps hugging his quarters
together.




                             IN CONCLUSION.


If you have carefully read thus far you may feel conscious that I have
repeated and reiterated again and again certain things in relation to
“fixing feet”. If I have done this more than to you seems necessary, it
is because of the importance of the things repeated, and because of my
desire to impress my readers with their importance.

If you find herein anything that you are specially interested in, that
to you may seem cloudy or involved, and not clear, I will be pleased to
clarify and elucidate any point by correspondence.

My life study and work has been in connection with the thing about which
I have herein written. I have been always, and am now, intensely and
vitally interested in this subject, and my reason for putting my ideas
into print is because of my extreme interest in the trotting and pacing
race horse, and also because of a hope that by widening, and extending
to others, the horizon of my experiences, by the means of a printed
book, I may help many a sore horse, as well as many a discouraged
trainer and driver and owner.

                                              WILLIAM J. MOORE,
                                                  Pittsfield,
                                                      Berkshire County,
                                                          Massachusetts.

 June, 1916.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BALANCING AND SHOEING TROTTING AND
PACING HORSES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
